---
layout: post
title:  "Functional Reactive Programing with Elm: Part VIII - Development environment"
date:   2016-02-12 13:00:28 -0500
summary:  In this post we will look at how to set up you development environment.   

categories: jekyll update
---

In this section we will look at how to set up the development environment for developing Web applications.

We were living in a nice little bubble where we could basically use [online editor/runner.][try-elm] and avoid a local install.

But once you need to start writing real web applications you will need a local install of Elm as well as other packages to support web development.

### Installing Elm
 Essentially I found the [Elm install instructions][Elm-install] to be fairly complete and adequate. So I will just point you to that. I am using Atom currently and find the setup for Elm quite ok. I will add some instruction of how to customize atom so you can interact with the repl.

### Hosting your Web Applications
We will look at two hosting scenarios for your app :

### Elm live

You will find all the documentation you need for the setup of Elm live at the [node package site for elm-live][Elm-live] or on the [elm-live GitHub site][Elm-live-github].

As you run through the install process you will find that Elm has a remarkably polite and communicative package manager.

{% highlight shell %}
$ mkdir TestApp && cd TestApp

-- you need this only if want to install elm locally
$ elm package install

-- This will install the html libraries and its dependencies.
$ elm package install evancz/elm-html

-- for some projects we will use the start-app package you can get it by
$ elm package install evancz/start-app

{% endhighlight %}

Now if you create a file `main.elm`

{% highlight Haskell %}
import Html
main =
   Html.text "Hello, World!"
{% endhighlight %}

You can now run your file through elm-live by:

{% highlight shell %}
$ elm-live main.elm --open
{% endhighlight %}


{% highlight html %}
<!doctype html>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="/style.css" />
<script src="/elm.js"></script>
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight shell %}
$ elm-live Main.elm --output=elm.js --open
{% endhighlight %}

You should be good to go.

The output to the console will tell you where you can point the browser to see your page.
If you use the defaults I found that it points to:
`http://192.168.1.113:8000/`

Now fire up you editor you should see your webpage. Make a change to main.elm to see the page update as soon as you save it.

###  Elm Reactor

Reactor comes with the Elm platform. So you can pretty much use it as soon as you have elm installed. You will find more information on the [Elm Reactor GitHub site]:[Elm-Reactor].

Just navigate to your project folder and on the command line run:
`$ elm-reactor`. You should see the elm reactor running at
`http://0.0.0.0:8000/` which is the default. If for some reason this does not work you might want to try two things to trouble shoot this:

* Ensure that any firewall you are running is not blocking access to this port.
*  Also you can just try changing the port using the `-post`
and `-address` options as described on the [Elm Reactor GitHub site][Elm-Reactor].

The Elm reactor also has a built in Debugger that we will discuss in a later post on Debugging.


[Elm-Live]:https://www.npmjs.com/package/elm-live
[Elm-live-github]:https://github.com/tomekwi/elm-live
[try-elm]: http://elm-lang.org/try
[Elm-install]:http://elm-lang.org/install
[Elm-Reactor]:https://github.com/elm-lang/elm-reactor
